ETF6
N. Charupat and Peter Miu, 2011, The pricing and Performance of leveaged exchange traded funds, Journal of Banking and Finance, volume 25, pp 966-977. Leverage ETF provide returns that are a multiple or a negative multiple of an index. They are traded by retail investors with very short holding periods. They are mostly close to NAV but large deviations can occur. The first of these funds were introduced in 2006 in the US. They aim to gain a (negative) multiple of a major index. Margin requirements are higher for these funds. The volume traded is relatively large for the size of the underlying market. They are designed for short-term investors. They aim to replicate the daily return, multiplied by some amount. In order to do this the funds have to rebalance daily in order to maintain the required amount of leverage. This rebalancing means that the returns over a period of more than one day to differ from the promised ratio.  As a result, most investors limit their holding to short periods. This paper examines the characteristics, efficiency and tracking errors. The study is the Canadian market  where there is one ETF and a corresponding multiple. In the US there may be many version of the same index. These ETF use in-cash procedure rather than in-kind. Leverage holding period is just 15 days and there are traded in smaller amounts. Arbitrage on price discrepency is not easy as the meachism is not straight-forward and the premiums on leverage ETF are more volatile. 

The premium on bull ETF are negatively related to returns. This is consistent wtih the thought of Cheng and Madhaven (2009) that end of day rebalancing increaes trading volume and market volatility. Tracking error increases after 1 day.  The greater the volatility of the underlying, the greater the tracking error. Beyond a week the tracking error is significant. 

One key aspect of this is the focus on 'daily returns'. Leverage is used to achieve the required returns. This is usually done through the use of derivatives (such as forwards or total return swaps). To maintain the return, the portfolio has to be adjusted daily to reflect changes in the value of the underlying benchmark. This is different from a forward contract where the dollar amount of leveage is fixed. In that case it is the percentage leverage that needs to be fixed. While it is mathematically possible for a leverage ETF to lose more than 100% (if a -2 /times ETF were to rise 50%), in practice the investor would only lose the value of their investment. For volatile indices, options will be used to hedge extreem moves. 

There are two major types of expense: the management fee that will be determined by the ETF provider and the cost of buying the derivatives. According to this paper, the management costs range from 75bp to 115bp and the derivative costs range from 16bp to 139bp. As with all ETF, the return depends on two factors: the pricing efficiency and tracking error. The first is how well the assets track the target index and the second is any deviation from NAV. US fund companies are reqired to publish indicative NAV for ETFs every 15 seconds. There is no requirement in Canada. There are different procedures for creation/redemption can differ across funds: the timing and length of settlement can affect the ability of arbitragers. There is a lot of evidence that deviations are small and transitory (references on page 968). For leveage ETF the redemption is done in cash.  This makes it easier and less costly to initiate an arbitrage. There may be tax implications but the process should be easier. Tracking errors depend on replication methods, expenses and the underlying volatility. For leverage funds, the tracking error depends on this and the period over which the error is calculated. 

Most of these leverage ETF are traded more frequently than the non-leverage counterparts (there is one exception). However, the transactions in the leverage ETF are generally in much smaller amounts.  The leverage ETF allow the traders to achieve the same objective with half the amount of cash. The holding periods for the four bull ETF range from 8.35 days to 14.80 days.  This compares to the traditional ETF which were all over 40 days. The average for the four bear ETF is between 4.23 and 9.71. In this case the creation/redemption notice must be submitted by 9:30 in the morning, if it is later than that the transaction will be based on the NAV of the next trading day. The risk must be managed through the futures between the notification and the announcement.  The time lag increases the arbitrage bound.  In this case the deviations are small, most are not statistically significant and they are all within the bounds of bid-ask and transaction costs. There are, however, some extreme deviations and the standard deviation of the deviation is quite large.  It seems that the leverage ETF are more prone to trade at a discount or a premium than are the traditional funds. This is consistent wtih the previous evidence that the volatility of the deviation is related to the volatilty of the underlying (Engle and Sarkar (2006)). There is little evidence of autocorrelation in the premium. There is a negative correlation between the bull premiums and the benchmark returns (positive with bear premium and benchmark return). The authors suggest that this may be due to the short-term nature of the product, the profit-taking that takes place on the bull days and the way that they may enter the market on negative days. However, mid-prices exhibit the same pattern. It may also be caused by asynchronous trading: if the last ETF trades are before the underlying, the closing price of ETF will not reflect the full gains on a positive day. This seems to be unlikely due to the high amount of trading that takes place in these funds.  However, if could be due to rebalancing. Cheng and Madhavan (2009) show that the rebalancing is dependent on the net assets under management, the benchmark return on the day, and the multiple. Therefore the exposure adjustment is in the direction of the underlying benchmark movement no matter whether bull or bear. The adjustment increasees more than linearly with the multiple. As the assets under management of e ERF industry grow, the amount of adjustment increases. Typically this will happen towards the end of the day. Therefore the impact on the underlying wil be felt towards teh end of the day. The impact will depend on the market. 

Regression of the ETF return on the increase in NAV is carried out for daily, monthly and annual time periods. While the daily returns are very close to the NAV, the longer periods are further away. The coefficient on the year return is -0.449.  Holding the ETF for some time means that the published returns are not achieved. 

The Cheng and Madhavan (2009) adjustment is 

\Delta_t^j = (\beta^2 - \beta) NAUM_{t-1}^j i_{t-1}

Where \Delta_T^j is the amount of underlying to be bought; \beta is the multiplication factor, NAUM is the net assets under management and i is the return on the underlying in the previous period. 

ETF5
L.F. Ackert and Y.S. Tian, 2008, Arbitrage, Liquidity and Valuation of Exchange Traded Funds, Financial Markets, Institutions and Instruments, volume 17,. No. 5, pp 331-363.  The pricing of ETF funds relative to underlying assets. The liquidity hypothesis suggests that returns are higher in illiquid markets: in lilquid markets traded are effected at a low cost. There is a sample of 28 US Barclays Global Investors ETF. This is a follow up to Engle and Sarkar (2006) finding that domestic ETF have low discount while international have much higher and persistant divergences. For country funds there is the added caveat that funds may not fully reflect the underlying index due to ownership restrictions and to illiquidity. While the fund premium is usually small, the variation in the premium, particularly for country funds, can be quite large. Many country funds exhibit a large positive correlation in the fund premium. The average first-order autocorrelation is 3.4% for US funds, 21% for open economy and 40.7% for emerging economy funds. Time zone is only part of the answer. It is also due to liquidity, momentum and size effects. There may be taxes and other impediments to trade that hinder the arbitrage process. While there is the expected negative link between fund liquidity and premium in the US, there is a positive association between fund liquidity and the premium in the less liquid country funds. This is robust to alternative measures of liquidity.

There are two possible explanations: the relationship between liquidity and pricing is non-linear; fund premium is influenced by the liqidity of both ETFs and home markets. There may be a U shaped relationship between fund premium and liquidity.  Much depends on the segmentation of home and ETF market. ASIDE: it may be interesting to say something about other markets (like bonds) on the basis of this research. There is expected to be a postive relationship between home market illiquidity and the premium and a negative relationshiop between the ETF market and the premium when markets are segmented. The relationship between liquidity and premium is expected to be weaker in integrated markets. Table 1 lists the funds that are used in the analysis. There are 7 domestic US ETF, 14 where the underlying is a developed economy and 7 emerging  economy ETF. Nineteen of the twenty eight funds have a postive premium over NAV, nine have a discount on average. The largest discount was a 9.46% for Sweden and the largest premium was 8.5% for Taiwan. There are fewer discounts because creating new units is more costly for the trust and takes more time. The discounts and premiums are small relative to those for ADRs and CEFs. Table 2 is one that can be used in the study.

There is greater serial correlation in emerging market funds than those elsewhere. All the emerging market correlations are significantly different from zero, while only 9 of the 14 developed economies are significant and 2 of the 7 US ETF have significant autocorerlation. Somee of this can be explained by asynchromous trading but some of the emerging coutnries are in the same time zone as the US (Brazil). The partial autocorrelation suggests that some of the emerging market correlations remain significant up to 3 or 4 days.  There are two measures of liquidity: volume traded and the Amihud Iliquidity Measure (AIM) as the square-root of returns to volume. These measures are correlated but less so for emerging economies. For US ETF, there is the expected negative relationship between liquidity and the premium. The negative effect in the home market would not be expected if the market were segmented.  There may be liquidity spill-overs as the demnad for ETF creates need to create new units this requires puchase of underlying, adding liquidity in that market. This type of liquidity spill-over is not evident in markts like ADRs. 

ETF4
The ETF avoid the cash drag of mutual funds. There is a very good diagram on page 12 that shows the conversion and trading of shares. The price of the NAV and the price in the market are monitored frequently. The in-kind conversion and redemption allows the market to absorb shocks. In-kind means that managers can fully invest their portfolio. Exchanges will compute and publish the NAV of funds. There is some difference between the US and Europe: Europe is more likely to constrain the competition between ETF for the same index. Exchanges may also license their own ETF. There are two main structures: Unit INvestment Trusts and Mutual Funds.  The latter are more flexible and more popular as they allow the reinvestment of dividends, the use of derivatives and the loaning of stock. 

There has been an increase in the type of ETF that has been eatablished: there is a movement into sectors (allowing sector rotation) and into international markets (allowing diversification and rotating). There is greater risk of divergence from NAV in the latter as the fund may not trade at the same time as the underlying components. The first fixed-income ETF were introduction in Canada in 2000 and the iShares produced products meant toreplicate the Goldman Sachs and Lehman Brothes bond indices. These do not mature but maintain a bond portfolio that relects the index's maturity target.  Commodity ETF can hold commodities but are more usually based on derivatives to ensure replication. There are also currency ETFs that tend to hold money market instruments in that currency. 

Price efficiency
The structure of ETF is designed to ensure that there is pricing efficiency. There is a close-end fund puzzle: they tend to trade at a discount to the NAV. The explanations include biases in NAV calculation, agency costs, tax efficiency and market segmentation. Unpredicatble investment sentiment makes arbitrage difficult. Some work shows that there are larger deviations in the lower cap ETF, suggesting that the cost of arbitrage is a likely explanation. Most work suggests that deviations from NAV do not persist beuyond one day. A rise in trading volume is linked to divergence, suggesting that arbitrage is taking place. Engle and Sarkar (2002) find that deviations from NAV are larger and more persistent for overseas than domestic ETF.  For Japanese and ETF from Hong Kong, in 2004 an Indicated Optimized Portfolio Value was released through the day based on stage stock prices and updated exchange rates. Back in 2004 there were some predicatable and systematic deviations from NAV - Madura and Richie (2004). There is some tracking error.  ETF tend to slightly under-perform mutual funds.  Gastineau (2004) puts this down to fund anticipating index adjustments while ETFs wait for the announcement. The cost advantage is even greater for international ETF. 

There may be some changes to the market as a result of the introduction of the ETF: if liqudity traders migrate to the new index, there is a higher proportion of infomrmed traders for the component stocks and the greater risk of adverse selection - Gorton and Pennacchi (1993). Introduction of ETF arbitrage could increase liquidity in the underlying. Hegde and McDermott (2004) find empirical evidence of an increase in liquidity for underlying stocks in the DJIA with the introduction of the Diamonds. There is some evidence that the introduction of ETF has reduced the divergence between fitures and option prices and the underlying.  Artbitrage is presumably easier.

ETF3
This is about the 'Flash Crash' of 6 May 2010. In the afternoon the Dow fell 998.5 points (the largest fall in history). This was followed by a 600 point recovery in 20 minutes. This is regarded as a macro event as it affected a large range of securities no one specific stock. It also happened over a much shorter period than events like 1987. ETP were most affected with large divergence between ETF and their components. ETP accopunt for 70% of the orders cancelled. This study will look at the flash crash from the view of fragmentation. This can be measured in two ways: by the pattern of volumes traded across different venues; a venues quotation activity at the best bid or offer.  Those venues that experienced greater volume and quote fragmentation in the month before 6 May were disaproportionately affected by the Flash Crash. In September 2011 fragmentation was at the highest level recorded with 12 exchanges competing with about 30 dark pool providers

A joint report from the CFTC and the SEC found that at 2.32 on 6 May 2010 a large fundamental trader used a broker-provided trading algorithm to sell 75,000 e-mini contracts with a notional amount of approximately $4.1bn. The trade would hedge an existing position. The trader failed to set a price limit. The NYSE introduced a 'slow trade model' or 'liquidity replenishment points'.  Liquidity providers appeared to back out of the market due to the uncertainty caused by the LRP. The trade was just 9% of the 140,000 e-mini contracts traded on the CME between 2.41 and 2.44.  

The evidence suggests that ETP were much more affected by the Flash Crash.  Their average drawdown was 0.24 compared to 0.08 for other products. The relative increase in the volume of trade for ETP on 6 May was much greater than that of other products. ETP were also subject to a much greater use of ISO (Sweep orders) than other products. 

There is evidence that the uncertainty of the quoted prices of component stocks makes it increasingly challenging for market-makers as the normal arbitrage process breaks down. The iShares Russell 1000 Growth ETF (TWF). Prior to the crash, the ETF closely tracks the net asset value. At 2.45 the constituents of the basket cannot be priced, the uncertainty causes delinking of price and value. The ETF falls sharply, rebounds and the link between price and vlaue is restored around 3.10. There is a diagram at the end of the work that may be useful. 

ETF2
By the end of 2016 ETF captured over 10% of total market capitalisation traded in US markets and 30% of the overall traded volume. ETF spondors issue securities that are traded on major stock exchanges and usually seek to replicate an index. There is physical or synthetic replication or a combination of the two. They issue securities that are a claim on the underlying pool of assets. Exchange traded pooled investment vehicles are collectively designated as exchange traded products (ETP). Most ETF are structured as open-ended investment companies. SPY is a unit investment trust (this cannot lend stock like the open-ended investment funds). Mutual funds are usually only redeemable at the end of the day. They have featurs of the open-ended and closed-end funds: their value is close to asset value and they are traded on exchanges. 

There are two mechanisms to keep prices aligned with the underlying: creation and redemption of shares by authorised participants; arbitraging ETF and underlying by market participants. There is some risk to this arbitrage. The tracking error is much lower. Synthetic ETF are usually based n an asset-return swap and are more popular in Europe than the US. Counterparty risk: Physical ETF engage in stock lending while synthetic ETF are exposed to the other side of the derivative contract. 

ETF were 36% of trading volume in 2016 despite being just 10% of the market. ETF are also very useful for short-selling. 20% of short-interest is ETF shares. There are frequent opportunities for arbitrage for the Authorised Participants and other institutions like market-makers, hedge funds and proprietary trading desksi. This may also be done by algorithmns now. Authorised Participats are a small group of firms that will artbitrage the discepancy. It is possible to monitor the Indicative Net Asset Value (INAV) every 15 second in US markets for underlying baskets that trade continuously. The primary transactions that are used to create the ETF are large blocks of creation units. 70% of the ETF traded in the US are created with blocks of 50,000 ETF shares. There are a few with 100,000. A daily creation basket provides information about the specific list of names and quantities of securities or other assets designated to track the performance of the portfolio and which the AP needs to deposit in exchange for ETF creation units. In some cases there may be slight discepancies. The AP pays the trading cost.  This is usually in the region of 1bp (presumably this is paid for by the artbitrage). According to Antoniewicz and Heinrichs (2014) there are on average 34 APs per ETF. Some APs also act as ETF market-makers. Other market participants engaged in 'arbitrage' face risk that prices will move further away before they converge (noise-trader risk). 

Active managers pick stocks or engage in market-timing to beat a benchmark or generate an absolute return. Active management is based with reference to the benchmark or absolute returns, passive managment is measured on tracking error. Some ETF try to beat the benchmark. There has been a large increase in passive investment in recent years. It is clear that the market is more efficient than previously thought. Index funds provide a cost-efficient way to expose fund managers to risk factors. There are different views: Stambaugh (2014) present a model with active and passive investment.  Here the retail investors provide the noise and the opportunity for acitive investment. The rise in passive investment reduces the 
efficiency of the market.  Bond and Garcis (2016) argue that returns are the result of a few stocks and that index investing means that retail investors have low exposure to these stocks. Wurgler (2011) identifies indefficiencies caused by inclusions and deletions from indices. There is also a large literature on the co-movement of stocks with the index.  See Morek (2002), Wurgler and Zhuravskaya (2002), Greenwood (2005) 

Another trend has been the concentration that has developed. Part of this may be the result of the economies of scale that passive investment brings. Ben-David, Franzoni, Moussawi and Sedunov (2015) find that the stop 10 fund managers owned 5% of US stocks in 1980 but this had rise to 23% by the end of 2014. This can led to increased volatility if non-fundamental factors cause changes in portfolio (changes of strategy or personnel). 

There is also a question of corporate governance as the nature and composition of institutional investors changes. Bradley and Litan (2011) argue that issues with corporate governannce and price discovery will discourage private firms from going public.  However, evidence has generally contradicted this claim. Boone and White (2015) find that as firms have increased instititions (mostly passive) investment the transparency of their reporting also rises. They studied firms moving from the bottom of the Russell 2000 to the top of the Russell 1000. Appel, Gormely and Keim (2016) use a similar natural experiment and find that increasd passive investment has a postive effect on a number of corporate governance measures, including poison pills and restrictions on shareholder a\bility to call special meetings and fewer duel-class share structures.  

Contrary to popular belief Franzoni and Moussawi (2013) find that ETF investors have shorter time horizons. It also appears from the reports from market particpants that ETFs are competing with futures markets for institutional investors. ETF may be cheaper when the roll is considered. there are a number of reports from the FT. Roll dates are also likely to show mis-pricing. For investors there may be a trade off between the liquidity risk of ETF and the cost of mutual funds. 

There is competition between ETF sponsorts and the traditional fund managers over fees. Blocher and Whaley (2016) find that lending fees are as important as management fees. When there is discretion, portfoio managers tilt the portfolio towards stocks with greater lending fees. Evans, Moussawi, Pagano and Sedunov (2017) find that settlement failures are associated with delays in the creation/redemption process and an increase in financial stress. There is some evidence from Bhattacharya, Loos, Meyer, Hackethal and Kaesler (2017) that ETF may encurage retail investors to time the market are receive lower returns. Similarly, Goetzmann and Massa (2003) find that ETF flows are strongest when past returns have been good.lifford, Fulkerson and Jordan (2014) as well as Broman (2016) find similar results with more up-to-date data. 

Though the continuous arbitrage between the ETF and the underlying asset appears to create liquidity, there are two additional effects: price-discofery in the underlying securites may be enhanced: none-fundamental factors behind portfolio adjustment may cause deviations from fundamental value. Stratmann and Welborn (2012) and Broman and Shunn (2016) find that ETF are the favoured vehicle for investors taking directional bets on the index. With the work of the AP this transmits information from the index to the individual securities. Several studies find that ETF enhance price discovery: Richie, Daigler and Gleason (2008) report close connection between the futures and the ETF; Glosten, Nallareddy and Zou (2016) find that stock incorporate information more quickly once th3y are in an ETF. They argue that some of the increase in the comovement of individual stocks and the index is due to the more effective incorporating of systematic risk. Werners and Xue (2015) also report enhanced price discovery at the ETF level. They argue that price movement that is led by the ETF is informed while price movement that is led by the securities is noise.  They find that informed trading is permanent while noise trading is transitory. Li and Zhu (2016) argue that ETF can be used to circumvent sort-selling restrictions on individual stocks. They document that short-selling interest predicts returns.  

Others find that price discovery is damaged by ETF. Da and Shive (2014) find enhanced comovement of stocks and a lower level of ideoisyncratic volatility. Individual stocks are less responsive to individual news. Israeli, Lee and Shridharan (2017) show that stocks owned by ETF have higher trading costs, higher comovement with the index exhibit lower information efficiency and receive less analyst coverage. Broman (2016) show that ETF attract short-term sentiment-driven noise trader. 

There is also disagrement over liquidity. Marshall, Nguyen and Visaltanachoti (2015) document patterns that show the positive effect of arbitragers like AP on liquidity. Agarwal, Hanouna and Moussawi and Stahel (2016) find that stock liqudity comoves with the liquidity of the ETF and that this has increased in recent years. Others suggest that trading in ETF crowds out traders in the underlying securities. Petajisto (2017) finds significant deviation of ETF prices from underlying assets - particularly when the assets are illiquid. Piccotti (2014) suggest that this deviation can be permanent and that this may be due to a liquidity premium. Dannhauser (2016) finds that the introduction of corporate bond ETF reduces liquidity in the underlying bonds. Pan and Zeng (2016) suggest that AP have a duel role as mantainers of the ETF and market-makers. They may refrain from maintaining prices at times of stress (high VIX). 
 
Malamud (2015) presents a model where the cration/redemption activity of AP will propogate temporary liquidity shocks to the underlying securities. This propogation begins with demand-shocks at the ETF level. There are a mixture of retail investors and short-term market participants. Ben-David, Franzoni and Moussawi (2013) have showed the influence of short-term traders, this is supported by Stratmann and Welborn (2012) and by Broman and Shum (2016). There is risk that short-term investors exit the market during turmoil.  Ben-David, Franzoni and Moussawi (2012) show that hedge funds left the market during the global financial crisis. Ben-David, Franzoni and Moussawi (2013) show that ETF ownership can drive underlying securities away from their fundamental value, they also show that there is a link between ETF ownership and return volatility. They do this by looking at stocks that move from the Russell 1000 to the Russell 2000. The Russell switch happens once a year based on capitalisation. This is a natural experiment. This is based on the observation that the ETF ownership is higher for the top stocks in the Russell 2000 than the bottom stocks in the Russell 1000. The researchers control for other types of institutional ownership. The ETF ownership is statistically and economically significant. (ASIDE: there are some figures in this paper that will be useful). Krause, Ehsani and Lien (2014) also show that ETF stocks have higher volatility and higher volume. Staer (2014) shows that ETF flows are contemporaneous with index returns and that price effects reverse after a few days. Baltussen, Da and van Bekkum (2016) find that negative serial correlation has become more pronoounced since indexisation. They put this down to non-fundamental shocks that are subsequently reversed. 

It can also be argued that the rise of the ETF means that prices are set by investor demand for the index rather than the underlying securities.Da and Shive (2014) show that stocks that are part of an index tend to comove and lose their ideosyncratic volaility. They instrument ETF ownership with the inception and closure of ETF funds. Sullivan and Xiong (2012) and Israeli, Lee and Sridharan (2017) find similar evidence. Chinco and Fos (2016) develp a model where small changes in stock prices can cause re-balancing that leads to cascades as a result of feedback effects. ASIDE: maybe return to the potfolio insurance of 1987 and that picture of the Dow returns. 

The conflicting evidence about price discovery and liquidity may be the result of prices moving quickly to reflect new information while also being more affected by liquidity shocks. Bhattacharya and O'Hara propose a model where ETFs hold assets that are less liquid than the ETF itself, Market-makers seek to extract information from the ETF but this information comes with some noise that is propogated to the underlyng securities. 

Leverage ETFs have attracted attention beause they need to rebalance their portfolio in order to multiply the gains relative to an index or return the inverse of the index. This is done with leverage or derivatives. There is concern that these re-balancing efforts will have a considerable impact on the market. For example, leverage ETFs were blamed for the 1% increase in the  S&P 500 in the last 18 minutes of 10-Oct-2011. According to Cheng, Madhavan (2019, the dynamics of leverage ETF lead to same-directional re-balancing. This is similar to portfolio insurance. Jiang and Uan (2016) explore the flow to ETF and characterise those to ETF as 'momentum' and those to leverage-ETF as 'contrarian'.  Bai, Bond and Hatch (2015), Tuzan (2015) show that leverage ETF move prices in the same directon as the recent trade. 

ETF that track volatility indices have similar effects to leverage ETF. Volatility indices to do have constant weight but change daily according to the expiraton date of the derivatives. Therefore, ETF that follow the index have to re-balance each day. Dong (2016) reports that the introduction of VIX ETF produced strong predicted demand due to re-balancing.  

ETF and volatility: there is concern that ETF may contribute to volatility shocks. The main concern is that during periods of market volatility market makers and arbitragers will cease intermediation because of lack of reliable pricing. This can lead to illiquidity in the underlying stocks. The most well known example is the Flash Crash of 6 May 2010. Borkovec, Domowitz, Serbin and Yegerman (2010) report a significant decline in ETF liqudity during this period: speads widened and the limit order book dried up. This is consistent with evidence that traders leave the market as liquidity declines and volatility increases. There was a disconnect between the ETF and the underlying assets and price discovery was no longer taking place. Madhavan (2010 surveys the 2010 'flash crash' and agrees that liquidity providers left the market. Illiquidity, uncertainty and increased volatility may cause APs to refrain from arbitrage activity. Page 22 has a number of studies that look at the way that liquidity shocks are transmitted across markets that rely on each other for information (ETF and underlying). The greatest regulatory concern is over the leveraged and synthetic ETF. After the flash crash the SEC introduced rules to halt trading in individual securities and ETF if there are large price movements. Hanouna, Moussawi and Stahel (2016) discuss the 24 Aug 2015 liquidity event and find that arbitrage between ETF and underlying creates some useful liquidity. There was a similar disconnect between ETF and underlying emerging market stocks on 20 Jun 2013, many emerging economies were closed at the time of the US selling of Emerging market ETF. (there is list of more events on page 23). Pan and Zeng (2016) is a good model for this. 

It appears that ETF help to improve prices discovery of underlying assets but also increase volatility as they attract short-term noise traders to the market. ETF increase liquidity in normal conditions but provide a false sense of security becase that liquidity often evaporates when uncertainty rises, adding to volatility and reinforcing the noise in the market. ETF may even draw liquidity away from the underlhing asset as is uncovered in Dannhauser (2016) with corporate bonds.

ETF1
1993 the SPDRs were created. Like mutual funds they lower transaction costs. Mutual funds are split into closed end and open ended funds: closed end have a fixed number of shares and there can be a difference between the price of these shares and the NAV and therefore the returns may not match those of the underlying assets; open ended funds take money and invest that in the assets of the fund, a withdrawal is funded by asset sales.  Though there is no difference between the NAV and the price of the shares in the open ended fund, there are transaction cost to buying and selling assets and these activities can create capital gains and losses for investors that may be taxed. To deal with this the asset manager will probably keep some cash and liquid assets, and will tend to concentrate on the largest, most liquid assets in the investment universe. 

ETF have the benefits of both open-ended and closed funds: they are traded at all times in the market, they can be created and redeemed at any time by investors. An authorised participant will create and redeem share in kind. In-kind transactions have three benefits: transaction costs are minimal as there are no market transactions taking place; there are no asset sales and therfore no taxable event; the fund manager can redeem the shares with the lowest cost basis in the portfolio (for example if shares are bought at 1, 2 and 3 dollars and the current market price is 4, the 1 dollar shares can be delivered and this means that if re-balancing is ncessary there is less of a capital gain liqbility). Investors also like the connection between the asset return and the fund return (unlike closed ended funds). The arbitrage available for ETF should ensure that there is always a link between the two. With closed end funds, in-kind redemptions are not allowed or impossible. 

Problems: the flash-crash of 6 May 2010.  A collapse of the futures caused buying of futures and selling of stock. However, it was much easier tyto sell ETF than the underlying stocks.  As a result, there was a gap between the underlying stocks and the ETF. The arbitrage of ETF and stock bought selling of underlying stocks. In the absence of ETF, the transaction costs may have slowed the transmission and reduced volatility. This may be more the consequence of the fragmentation of the exchanges than the ETF market: NASDAQ 23.8% of equity dollar volume, NYSE Arca 16.5%, NYSE 12.6%, BATS 11.9%, Direct Edge X 8.1% and then a collection of other exchanges. 

Succesful financial productions tend to become more complex over time. Synthetic ETF promise to deliver a third party asset or a stream of income flows from the asset. These products produce counter-party risk and because they are not backed by the actual assets, they can be created in unlimited amounts, potentially causing exposure much larger than the underlying market. It is also possible to purchase ETF that will augment gains by using leverage to multiply returns. As is well known, leverage can also magnify losses. 

ETF
https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/6218589.pdf
- Basic overview. 
- Information on the physical and  synthetic ETF.
 - Physical hold underlying assets, they create shares and then sell them to an authorised participant for the underlying asset.  Authorised participant will buy and sell shares to maintain value.  Authorised participant is usually the sponsor of the ETF and is an investment bank of a fund manager
 - Synthetic ETF is sold to the Authorised Participant for cash. The cash is used to build a collateral basket that is used to make asset swaps with other financial institutions.  These swaps mimic the performance of the underlying asset.  Usually the counterparty is the parent of the organisation managing the ETF.  There are some issues with counterparty risk. 
- Synthetic ETF have less regulatory restriction in Europe compared to the US. 
- Commodities ETF usually use fugures rather than physical assets. This opens up risk of making or losing on the roll depending on whether there is contango or normal backwardation. 

