This is a paper from MSCI https://www.msci.com/www/blog-posts/using-factors-in-international/0775675812
Using factors in international investing. 
There has been a steady errosion of home bias, leading to an increase in mandates for active and passive international funds. Investment committees have become more comfortable about using factors as a complement to core passive and active investment. Do factors behave the same way outside the US as at home? This study finds that minimum volatility and momentum are 'global factors' while quality, dividend yield and size show little correlation with the US factors. The study is of MSCI ex-US benchmark. This is developed markets. There are three aspects to the study: a review of risk and return of these factors compared to the parent index; whether factors can act as hedges when international markets under-perform; relationship between international factors and active managers. 

The 6 MSCI factors are low volatility, size, momentum, quality, dividend yield and value. 

Factor, Ann Ret (Int), Ann Vol, Ann Ret (US), Ann Vol
Low voli, 9.5, 11.8, 7.8, 11.0
Size (equal weighta, 8.2, 17.2, 8.3, 17.0
Momentum, 6.9, 16.0, 9.4, 14.2
Quality, 7.8, 16.6, 6.8, 13.2
High Dividend, 7.3, 17.5, 7.6, 12.8, 
Value, 8.3, 18.7, 8.8, 16.7
Benchmark, 5.7, 16.7, 6.4, 14.2

May 2001 to Sep 2017. 

Correlation between factors (table 2).
Global factors like minimum voltility and momentum are more closely linked across markets. Investors Looking for lower risk or trending markets  are not usually internationally constrained. Fundamental factros are more local and hetrogenos. 
 

Bond diversification
French and Poterba (1991) find home bias in equity investment.  This has been repeated in many studies: Coeurbacier and Rey (2011), Mishra (2012). Also Burger and Warnock (2003) and Polwitoon and Tawatnuntachai (2006) have also looked at bonds. In either case, Perold and Shulman (1988) introduce the term 'free lunch' and Levich (2001) show that enhanced returns with lower risk can be achieved with international diversification. There are five main causes sugggested for the home bias: Exchange rate risk (Hau and Rey (2004) and Gournichas and Rey (2005)); Transaction costs (Tesar and Werner (1995); Information asymmetries (Ahearne et al. 2004); Geographical proximity Portes and Rey (2005); Behavioural (Huberman, 2001).  

There are two approches to the test of diversification: the model based and return based. The model based uses the International Asset Pricing Model (ICAPM) - Sharpe (1964). Asset allocation is based on international asset capitalisation; the return based uses time series and optimized the allocations according to statistical properties.  Constraints on international investment have eased in most cases. Over time some diversification has been see but this has tended to be localised and there is a portfolio version of the gravity model. For example, US investors have increased their investment in Canadian equities to the point where they are overweight relative to weight that would be requiered by capitalisation see Tesar Werner (1995). Polwitoon and Tawatnuntachai (2006) assessed the performance of US bond funds relative to a diversified fund for the period 1993 to 2004 and found that international diversification could increase returns by between 0.5% and 1.0% per annum with no increase in risk.

It is possible that some reduction in the allocation to international bond funds is the result of exchange rate risk.  Exchange rate risk can be hedged.  This can be done in two ways: passive and active.  Passive hedging would make a decision to either hedge or not hedge; active hedging would seek to hedge at the opportune moment. ASIDE: this is currency overlay.  Is currency an additional asset class? The general consensus is that active management is not successful and increases costs while passive hedging may be effective. Perold and Schulman (1988) show that US investors would achieve the same return with lower risk if international diversification were accompanied by currency hedge. Levich (2001) finds the same for bond investments in the period 1997-1990.

There is a question of whether correlation has increased over time. Hunter and Simon (2004) look at US, German, UK and Japanese bond markets for the period 1992-2002 and find that there are diversification opportunities for US investors wtih a currency hedge, that correlations have increased but are less than that for equities and that the US, German and UK makets are more similar. 

The Euro eliminated exchange rate risk. Lane (2006) studies changes in the composition of European portfolios during the years 1997 to 2004 and found that cross country investmetn among Euro zone members is much greater than that of other country pairs. HaselMann and Herwartz (2010) studied German investors in the period 1980 to 2003 and found that German bond investment fell by 17 percent and investment in other Euro markets increased by 15%. ASIDE: is this the convergence trade?


From Research Affiliates:  Where is the Golbal Economy Going? 
https://www.researchaffiliates.com/en_us/publications/articles/682-where-is-the-global-economy-going.html
Yield curve slopes and equity market returns can be used to nowcast the economy. These signals suggest that a number of markets (such as Japan, US and Germany) are entering the correction phase of the business cycle. There are a number of concerns ahead: trade wars, Brexit, poliltical concerns in Germany and Italy.

Nowcasting is an increasingly important tool for the investor looking at market timing. By the time the GDP data has been released or the NBER has identified a downturn, it is too late. The slope of the yield curve will be at the steepest when the economy is rebounding from a recession and it flattens or inverts when the recovery looses momentum. The current flattening of the yield curve started in 2017 and has brough the curve to the falttest point since 2005. There are two measures of the business cycle used here: OECD output-gap and the St. Louis Fed slowdown-expansion phases. Given these four signals, there are four phases: bull, correction, bear, rebound.  There are interesting pictures for Germany, Japan, US and UK. The curve is very good at predicting corrections (flat average of 0.6 for US) and rebounds (steep average of 2.2%). 

Using past return there is a comparison of the return on equity over the the last 6 months and the average return over a longer period. The period is April 1991 to December 2017. 

International Portfolio Diversification
https://gbr.pepperdine.edu/2010/08/benefits-of-international-portfolio-diversification/
International correlation increases after exogenous shocks. Diversification benefits are reduced after these events. Developments that have increased the likelyhood of synchronisation of economies and markets: the development of multinational corporations and international supply chains; advances in technology; deregulation of fnancial systems; increase in international capital flows; abolishment of foreign exchange controls ASIDE: are the last few the same?  

This is a study of German, Japanese and US markets. Madura found that correlations had increased over time. Forbes and Rigobon tested contagion during the 1987 Asian crisis. Longin and Solnik () and Meric and Meric () have looked at the clustering of correlation. 

IndustryCountry
JLM Marcelo and JLM Quiros and JL Martins, 2013, The role of country and industry factors during volatile times, Journal of International Finanical Markets, Institutions and Money, Vol. 26. pp 273-290. 
Are sector effects more important than country effects? The results suggest that industry is more important than country.  Countries tend to move together during volatile periods suggests that industry diversificaton may provide more benefit in volatile times. However, countries do well in normal times. The solution is to diversify across coutnries and industries. 

The rise of globalisation raises the question of whether diversification should concentate on countries or coinsider the whole world and concentrate on industries. The host of evidence suggests that industry effects have become more important relative to couhtry effects. Fridman (1998) finds that there is increased correlation amongst European countries.  This is supported by subsequent studies. It suggests that there should be more focus on industries - Baca et al. (2000), Cavaliga et al. (2000). This is also accepted by Industry.  Many companies are internati0onal in their production and sales. EMU is an example.  The 2010 debt crisis shows that industry risk has not entirely disappeared. However, Brook s and De Negro (2002 and 2004) suggest that some of this may have come about as a result of the dot.com bubble and it deflation.  They find that there is little change without tech.  This report finds an increased industry effect even outside of tech.  There is increased evidence that volatilty means that correlations move towards unity.  THere are a number of high risk periolds in this sample: Asian crisi, LTCM, 9/11 and the dot.com collapse. 

Grimold et al. (1989) finds that 'most countries are more important than most industries but the most important industries are more important than the least important countries'. Baca et al. (2000), Cavaliga et al. (2000) in their study of 36 sectors and 21 countries between 1986 and 1999 find that indstries have become more important in the last 5 years.  However, Cheng et al (2005) find that country effects are still very important in emerging economies. However, in the Asian financial crisis of 1987, the shock was translated from one country to another.  ASIDE: risk on and risk off.   

The method is to use the Heston and Rouwenhorst (1994) equation

r_it = \alpha_it + \gamma_kt + \delta_jt + varepsilon_t

where r is the return on security i and time t, \alpha is a term common to all European stocks, \gamma and \delta are pure country (k) and industry (j) effects. The method has been criticised by Brooks and De Degro (2002) as it is rather rigid. This will provide the country factor and industry factor returns. This method can produce a time series of coefficients that can be averaged to get a general effect and assessed for changes in the relative importance. Three time periods are assessed: Jan 1990 to Dec 1998, Jan 1999 to Dec 2002 and Jan 2003 to Dec 2008. Tables 2 and 3 show the correlation of countries and industries. However, these correlations mix country and industry effects and are the average for the whole period. UK has the smallest country effect (0.49) followed by France (0.53) while Portugal (2.26) and Italy (2.2) and Spain (1.79) are large. For the industries telecommunication is largest (4.83), followed by technology (2.89), while industrials (0.07), consumer services (0.09) and financials (0.15) are much lower. The average effects for country and industry are 1.17 and 1.18 respectively. There is a large movement over time. In the first period, country effects dominate, in the second the industry dominate (with technology and telecommunications to the forefront), in the final period, they are about the same.  Table 5 gives a summary of results from various studies.  

HA Shwanky, R Kuenzel and AD Mikhail, International Portfolio diversification: a synthesis and an update, Journal of International Financial Markets Institutions and Money, 7 (1997), 303-327

Ex-post there are certainly benefits.  However, ex-ante it is difficult to select a portfolio as correlations are changing. The data are MSCI major country stock indices Jan 1990 to Dec 1995.  From the beginnng (Levy and Sarnat (1970) and Grubel (1967)) it is clear that there is greater benefit when including emerging economies. Roll (1992) suggests that a significant part of the gains from international diversification come from the varying industrial composition of countries. Odier and Solnik (1993) construct portfolios from the point-of-view of Germany, Japanese and UK investors and find the same results.

French and Poterba (1991) find that Japanese investors have just 1.9% overseas, US have 6.2% and UK have 18%.  They suggest institutional and behavioural explantions and find that institutional arrangements cannot explain much of the effect. Odier et al. (1995) find emerging economies have higher returns and higher risk and a correlation of just 0.31 between the retruns on emerging markets and those of the developed world. Solnik and Zucchinetti (?) suggest a portfolio that mixes 22% emerging market with 78% developed. Odier and Solnik (1993) examine correlation and find a surprisingly low correlation between US and Europe. They suggest that this is due to differences in trading times. European markets close before US and closeing times are used for comparison. Correlations have increased over time and are not stable.  Longin and Solnik (1995) find that correlations are higher in recessions and in times of high volatility. 

If the world capital market is integrated, assets with the same risk should have the same return. In this case the underlying risk factor should be the same for all assets.  In completely segemeted markets international diversification is not possible.  It is possible to test the return of individual securities against a common international risk factor. If there is a world risk factor particial integration exists. This model can be extended to break the international component down into international and exchange rate

r_i = \alpha_i + \beta_i r_m + \gamma_i s_i + \varepsilon

where r_i is the return on security i, \alpha_i is the individual risk, r_m is the international market risk and s_i is the exchange rate risk.  A range of Granger-causality tests have been carried out. They generally find two-way causality (uni-directional). This is consistent with market efficiency. 

AK Basu and J Huang-Jones, 2015, The performance of diversified emerging market equity funds, Journal of International Financial Markets and MOney, 35, 116-131

Globally diversified emerging equity funds do not outperform the market benchmark before costs.  There is no evidnce of market timing ability amongst these funds. Any persistence in performance is drive by poorly performing funds. Emerging market funds tend to be open-ended equity funds. The argument for mutual funds over ETF would be superior performance or evidence of persistence that can be followed. It is sometimes argued that emerging markets have less regulation and greater scope for inefficiencies that can be exploited. There is limited research on emerging market funds.  Mostly it is country or region specific. 

The history of studying mutual funds goes back to Jensen (1968) who found in the period 1945 to 1964 that US mutual funds earned 0.4% gross and -1.1% net of fees compared to the S&P 500.  Of 115 funds only 3 short significant alpha. Page 2 has a long list of US studies.  Otten and Barns (2002) examine the performance of 506 mutual funds in various European countries from 1991 to 1998. They emplooy the Carhart (1997) four factor model and report positive alpha for all countries outside Germany. However, only he UK outerpformed the benchark after expenses and it appears that the failure to include a momentum factor explains the performance (see Blake and Timmermann 1998). 

Analysis of emerging economies is more mixed, tends to focus on individual countries and frequently suffers from survivership bias.   There are three questions: is it possble to select securities, is it possible to time teh mraket and is it possible to do this persistently. These studies often use US markets as the equity factor. Blitz and Huij (2012) evaluate the performance of Emerging market ETF. They find that they fall short of their benchmark by about 85 bp. This is in line wtih costs and witholding tax on dividends. Stromqvist (2007) presents evidence that hedge funds do not outperform underlying benchmarks in teh period 1994-2004. 

Persistence is usually assessed by spliting performance into two periods and then using a rank correlation test to see if there is a relationship between the two. Sharpe (1966) finds a correlation coefficient of 0.36 for the Sharpe Ratio over two compartive decades but this is not statistically significant. Jensen (1968) finds positive correlation in alpha but this is attributed to poorluy performing funds. Various studies struggle to find persistence.  Mayve short run and maybe in the worse performing.  Clearly there is a differece between net and gross returns. The net expense ratio is an average 2.08 for all the funds in the sample. There are other sales charges:  net loading fees and redemption fees. 

THe factors are created by taking the MSCI large cap and small cap as well as the MSCI growth and value and taking the difference in the return of hte two ndices to re-create a large-cap/small-cap and a value-growth index along the lines of Fama and French. The results show that the coefficient on the market index is close to one. The funds performance in the perid August 2008 to July 2010 (crisis) is worse than the average. This is probalby due to the problem of redemption during difficult periods for the fund. Investors are more likely to switch to safer assets in developed markets. ASIDE:  US for example. The funds in the top quartle have a slightly better performance. The beta of the top quantile is low and the beta of the lower quantiles is above 1. This may suggest that the top performing funds were able to switch to safter assets (cash) during this time.  

The distribution of alpha for individual funds is between -0.25 and +0.25.  However, there is a negative skew showing that there is some serious under=performance. The largest proportion of funds have insignificant alpha. there is no evidence of market timing. The estmates of beta and gamma are both insigificant. The results do not change when the assessment is based on quartiles. less than 2% of the funds show any evidence of market timing with positive lambda (rememmber that this has changed from gamma). Sixteen percent of funds have negative lambda. However, the percentage of funds with positive lambda during the period of the financial crisis (2008 to 2010) increased to 8.3%, suggesting that funds were more active during that period. 

The persistence of the rank decile compared to 3 and 6 months ahead is 35% for 3 months and 29% for 6 months. 

P. Sharma and Vipul, 2018, Improving portfolio diversification, identifying the right baskets for putting your eggs, Management Decision Economics, 

There is no unique or broadly accepted measure of diversification. A good measure of diversification should be able to predict future performance. This study also assesses the main beneficiaries of divedrsification. There are five measures of diversification; negative average correlaton (NAV (Skintzi and Refenes, 2005); the effective number of constituents ENC (Bera and Park, 2008); portfolio diversification index PDI (Rudin and Morgan, 2006); diversification ratio DR (Chouifaty and Coignard, 2008); the effective number of bets ENB (Meucci, Santangelo and Deguest, 2015). It introduces another measure - the unsystematic risk ratio (URR). The study uses a set of 20,697 assets from four asset classes: currencies, bonds, equtties and commodities for the period Jan 1990 to Dec 2017. Over 10,000 strategies are implemented wtih combinations of debt, equity, debt-equity and multiasset. The strategies differ by investment universe, investmetn style and rebalancing policy. 

Carli, Deguest and Martellini (2014) provide an overview of diversification measurement. They classify diversificastions into three categories: weight-based, risk-based and factor-based. The weight measures are based on teh Herfindahl index.  The weakness here is that there is a reliance on assets rather than risk characteristics of the portfolio assets. Roll (2013) has shown that even when assets are driven by the same risk factords, the correlation of their return can be quit low. ASIDE: such as the equity risk that we have lookeed at before. In this case a more effectivemethod is to identify the underlying risk factors and diversify across those. Factor-based diversification is based on this understanding. A portfolio that has a high concentration of limited orthogonal factors is not considered to be diverisfied. The difficulty is to identify the underlying factros. Principal components can be used, the the interpretation of the components can be difficult. The minimum linear torsion (MLT) is dea with some of these issues.  

It is also possible to assess diversification by the ratio of systematic risk to total risk, with the higher measure indicating that the greatest benefits of diversification have been achieved. However, the measure of un-systematic risk is model-dependent.  This puts more emphasis on the model. It is also difficult to extend these to a multi-asset setting. There is no unique asset pricing model that is unique to any investment universe. 

The data are divided into three regresions: developed, emerging and frontieer markets. These are classfied according to the MSCI.  Up to 200 securities in each asset class are selected for each country. They are selected according to capitalisation and include non-active securities.  This is augmented by 143 currencies and 44 commpdities.  US 3-month tbill is risk-free.

There are details of all the measures of diversification on page 4. A form of principal components is used to find risk factors and the residual from this rolliing computation is identified as the non-systematic risk. The investment strategies are based on different investment universes: countries and regions for example, particularly aset clases or multi-asset. Equities are broken into equally weighted, market-weighted and then according to value, momentum, dividend yield and low volatility. The debt securities are broken down into sub-components like short-term sovereign debt and long-term corpoate debt etc. Rebalancing is also carried out according to monthly, quarterly, semi-annual and annual.   There are various debt-equity combinations and there are various multi-asset strategies that are based on either equity weights or asset tilts with a variety of rebalancing. If security becomes inactive (it matures) the proceeds are invested at the risk-free rate. 

Weekly values of the diversification measures are calculated for each of the investment portfolios. In addition, future performance of returns, standard deviation and Sharpe are taken for the next quarter, year and two years. For each week the future performance is regressed on the diversification measure to determine whether the time series average of the divesification measure is a good predictor of the future. This is done by testing the t-statistic of the slope. 

There is no reason to believe that the relationship between the diversification measure and the future performance is linear. There may be a weak link between the average diversification measure and performance but the best and worse of the diversifications may provide information. Results show no significant link between the diversification measure and future returns. However, there is a robust relationship between the future standard deviation and the measure of diversification. Future standard deviation decreases with more diversification. Only the ENR and URB diversification idices give information about the future Sarpe Ratio. These two diversification measures o

As a rebustness check the tests are re-created wtih single assets, countries and regions and they are broken into different time periods: 1 Jan 1990 to 30 Sep 2007 pre-crisis, 1 Oct 2007 to 18 Jun 2009 crisis and 19 Jun 2009 to 3 Dec 2017 post-crisis (Dungey, Milunovich, Thorp and Yang (2015)). Strategies are also divided into low risk, medium risk and high risk. These robustness checks show that the diversification premium is larger for frontieer and emerging markets, for multi-asset strategies and for high risk strategies. It appears that developed markets are more likely to be correlated, that individual assets are more likely to be correlated and it may be that high risk strategies have a higher level of un-systematic risk and that this can be partly elemimnated by diversification. The diversification premium falls during the financiae crisis but it is not toltally eliminated.  There is some evidene, consistent with Yang, Kolari and Min (2003) and Maghyereh, Awartani and Hilu (2015) that correlation has increased since the financial crisis. 
